---
layout: post
title:  "A Plethora of Data: Accessing Data from the World Bank"
date:   2022-08-03
author: Project Author
description: How to Use the World Bank API
image: 
---

## Introduction:

How will you make a difference in the world?
That sentence may seem out of place in a blog post that is about accessing data from API. However, I think it is always worth evaluating how we are using our talents and skills to make the world a better place. With that in mind, this is a brief post on how to use the World Bank API. The World Bank has an absolutely astonishing amount of data that is publicly available, and you can make interesting and applicable datasets that have never been analyzed before.

## Ethics:

Before we access any of the data, we need to make sure that we have permission to do so. If we look at the World Bank “Summary Terms of Use” article, we read the following:
>Unless indicated otherwise in the data or indicator metadata, you are free to copy, distribute, adapt, display or include the data in other products for commercial or >noncommercial purposes at no cost under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, with the additional terms below.

In the additional terms below, it states the following regarding APIs:

>You may use our application programming interfaces (“APIs”) to facilitate access to the Datasets, whether through a separate Web site or through another type of >software application.

I would recommend reading through the entire [summary](https://data.worldbank.org/summary-terms-of-use), as there are some other stipulations, such as how to give attribution to the World Bank when publishing. For our purposes, the abovementioned terms of use mean that we are free to proceed. 

## Accessing the Data:

There are several great ways to access the data made available by the World Bank, but this post will focus on how to access the data through an API. Thankfully, the World Bank has provided an API that we can use. It can be a little tricky to understand, but extensive documentation can be found [here](https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/topics/125589-developer-information). 

#### The Harder Way:

In my opinion, the harder way to access data through the API is to structure the API URL yourself. This can be down as follows as shown below. The base URL for the “indicator” database is provided in the developer information found [here](https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/898581-api-basic-call-structures)). We can customize what data we want to grab by selecting the “Indicator ID”. A list of indicators can be found [here] (https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/898581-api-basic-call-structures). To get the ID for the indicator, you can click on the indicator, and then the “Details” box near the top right (see screenshot below):

To return the results as json, you can add “format = json” to the end of the URL. Additionally, the “requests” package will allow us to specify parameters, so we can indicate a time range, and what page number of the results we want. This method works, but quickly gets complicated. The result of our API call is a list, instead of a dictionary. Upon further inspection, we see that the first element of the list is the metadata, and the second element is the data we actual want (shout out to Dr. Tass for helping identify this). The second element in the list contains a dictionary of dictionaries, so it is necessary to sort out the nested dictionaries. Additionally, only the results of the first page are returned, so a loop iterating through each of the pages will be required to get all the data. 

This is doable, but it turns out there is a much easier way. 

#### The Easier Way:

Upon researching how to connect to the World Bank API, I found several YouTube videos that used python packages to easily access the data. However, I wasn’t convinced this was the best way. That is not until I found this [page](https://data.worldbank.org/products/third-party-apps) on the World Bank website that explains how to connect to World Bank data using third-party apps like Python and R. It even says the following:

>You are encouraged to develop software applications that utilize and add value to World Bank datasets. Many third party applications have already been developed, >including integration modules for Drupal, R, Python and STATA.

The quote included several links, and I decided it was worth investigating. I followed one of the links and discovered a beautiful python package called “wbgapi”. This package makes navigating some of the difficulties mentioned above an absolute breeze. Additionally, the website https://pypi.org/project/wbgapi/ contains a description of the project, and detailed documentation on how to use the package.

Because the documentation is so thorough, I will not go into detail in this blog post to avoid being too redundant.

As seen below, after selecting the variable IDs that I wanted to analyze, I put them into a list, and used the package to create a pandas data frame. I set the time range parameter to be 2010-2021 to I could see roughly the last ten years.

VOILÀ! A beautiful pandas data frame. 

I also decided to reset the index using `df.reset_index()` so that “economy” and “series” would be treated as columns.

Clearly not only is this an easier option, but I would argue that it is also the better option since you are less likely to make mistakes as you try to extract the data.

## Conclusion:

We now have a great data frame with a lot of data. But what do we do with that data? My next blog post will do an exploratory data analysis and dig into the actual data itself. It will go into detail on what decisions to make in regard to missing values, and the best way to clean the data set for our analysis of choice. 
Hopefully this post has been useful in understanding how to access the treasure trove of data made available by the World Bank. We were able to use a free python package to create a curated dataset quickly and easily. There are many different data elements to look at, and hopefully your insights can make the world a better place!

